---
layout: 	post
title:  	"Why Far Cry 2's multiplayer was better than you though and how Far Cry 3's went wrong."
date:   	2014-01-22 15:49:23
published:	true
tags:		game design, Far Cry 2,

---

#### The Forgotten Diamond
Heralding Far Cry 2 as the harbinger of new and innovative multiplayer seems like a weird thing. That's also not why I love the multiplayer in the game. It lacks polish in a lot of areas, with things like hitmarkers that seem to come and go and impactless machete animations. But that all goes out the window when you're playing Capture the Diamond with 9 other people in a LAN and somebody just destroyed the enemy jeep with a well placed shot from their grenade launcher, just before the enemy could score the final point. Because the gameplay that actually is there, is solid and fun.

The multiplayer somehow managed to completely ignore the wave that Call of Duty 4 created within the mulitplayer shooter genre. There's no killstreaks, no perks, no challenges. Almost nothing, as the game only has four game modes: Deathmatch, Team Deathmath, Capture the Diamond and a variant of domination called Uprising which is actually smarter than you'd think, because it gives a reason to acquire all three capture points, in gamemode where the most stable option is often to just hold two.

#### Weaponry & Environment
The gameplay is just like the singleplayer: sparse but open. The class system is serviceable, but doesn't attempt to become its own metagame. The lack of extraneous metagameplay and variety-mechanics like perks help focus the game on its core gameplay loop: the interaction between weaponry and environment.

Weapons need ammo, and you're always in need of more. There's no ammo packs, as the classes only differentiates between weaponry and not between team roles like Team Fortress or Battlefield. Ammo is distributed through ammo crates which are placed in fixed locations around the maps. So if you want to resupply, you need map control. These crates allows a team to defend themselves when they would otherwise be exhausted of resources. At the same time, the enemy can turn a place of relief into a death trap by igniting the crate. This is a great gameplay component that was lost in Far Cry 3's multiplayer. The gameplay of "resouce control" was transformed from a teamplay mechanic into an individual mechanic.

The fact that classes don't dictate team roles can be characterized as "unbiased gameplay". You don't need to be a medic to heal your teammate. You don't need a specific perk or anything to help your team. Every piece of equipment that you need is available within the actual gamespace. Adding perks, attachments and killstreaks are some of the other reasons why Far Cry 3's multiplayer is actually worse than its predecessor. Halo 4 is another example of how you can ruin a core gameplay formular by allowing players to customize their own gameplay. But that's a topic I'll explore in more depth in another blog post.

To finish off this gameplay loop of weaponry interacting with environment, we need to mention the fire and weather mechanics. Fire is great area denial mechanic and can be utilized by any class, with either flare guns, molotov cocktails or the iconic flame thrower. Just like fire denies movement, there's the weather to deny vision. It's amazing to see the difference in gameplay when a sniper-heavy map is filled with fog and rain. This is another thing that should be expanded in a true successor. There's tons of things that could be added: rivers that could flood, roads that could become mud-traps, actual storms with thunder and lightning.

#### Improving the Formula
In addition to an expanded weather system, there's a lot of other things that could be improved in a true successor to this rough diamond. More gameplay modes and more customization would be perfect. The game already has an amazing level editor, but the lack of gameplay customization seriously handicaps it. Modding tools were also sorely missed.

Though there's several "innovations" that this game doesn't need, a few things could be gained from the wave of modern shooters. Battlefieldian destruction and "levolution", and its the spotting and suppression systems could be a great fit for a game like Far Cry. Vaulting and leaning over objects might also help improve the "game feel" a bit, and would complement the existing ability to slide.

In general, a more dynamic environment and more ways to interact with it would greatly improve the gameplay. Secondary objectives, like radio towers (a nod to Far Cry 3), radio jammers, and other things could also provide interesting tactical oppurtunities and emphasize the fact that map control is important.

Finally, I've had an idea on how to incorporate interrogation into a multiplayer game. Just like teammates are able to revive fallen comrades, so should enemies be able to interrogate them, to reveal things like locations of enemies.

#### What's Next?
For my next blog post, I'll go through one of my original maps in the Far Cry 2 Map Pack that i've made and explore how I learned more about the intricacies of both the gameplay of Far Cry 2 and mapmaking in general.